The Project Gutenberg eBook of Confederate wizards of the saddle, by
Bennett Henderson Young

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Confederate wizards of the saddle

Author: Bennett Henderson Young

Release Date: March 4, 2023 [eBook #70204]

Language: English

Produced by: Bob Taylor, Carlos Colon, the Cornell University Library
             and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
             Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONFEDERATE WIZARDS OF THE
SADDLE ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




[Illustration: Bennett H. Young (signature)

  _Commander-in-Chief_ U. C. V.
]




  Confederate Wizards
  of the Saddle

  _Being Reminiscences and
  Observations of One Who Rode
  With Morgan_

  By

  BENNETT H. YOUNG

  Commander-in-Chief of the
  United Confederate Veterans Association

  [Illustration: Decoration]

  BOSTON
  Chapple Publishing Company, Ltd.
  1914




Copyright, 1914, by Bennett H. Young




Dedicated

to the

Women of the South


  IN THE DAYS OF PEACE
  The Creators of Chivalry and Gallantry

  IN THE DAYS OF BATTLE
  The Inspiration of Faith and Courage

  IN THE DAYS OF BLOOD
  The Angels of Comfort and Mercy

  IN THE DAYS OF DEFEAT
  The Spirits of Hope and Help




FOREWORD


Forty-eight years and a half have passed, since the last drum-beat
of the Confederate States was heard and the furling of their flag
forever closed the most wondrous military tragedy of the ages.
Numbers and character considered, the tribute the South paid to War
has no equal in human records.

Fifteen hundred years ago on the Catalaunian Plain, where Attila,
King of the Huns, styled “The Scourge of God,” joined battle with the
Romans under Oetius, and the Visigoths led by Thorismund, tradition
has it that hundreds of thousands of dead were left on the field.
The men who followed the cruel and remorseless Attila were a vast
horde, organized for war, with plunder as the highest aim of a
soldier’s life, and the Romans and Visigoths were men who followed
war solely for the opportunity it afforded to enslave, rob and
despoil those they conquered. On both sides the men who filled the
ranks had neither intelligence nor patriotism, and with each, war was
a profession or pastime, devoid in most cases of any exalted purpose,
even the dream of a conviction, or the faintest gleam of a principle.

If the dead on that fatal field were numbered by the hundreds of
thousands, their demise was a mere incident in the conflicts which
were carried on for no truth, and in their loss the world suffered
but little more than if as many beasts of burden had been sacrificed
on some heathen altar to appease the God of War.

The American war, in the middle of the nineteenth century, dealt
on both sides with far different materials. Christianity, liberty,
education, culture and refinement had reached a very high limit
on the human scale. When the North and South faced each other,
moved by patriotism and principle, the legions drawn from the very
best materials that the race could offer, with inherited courage,
quickened by personal and social pride, and with memories and
traditions of great military achievements, and ennobled by ancestral
escutcheons of exceeding splendor, there met for battle such men as
the world had never before seen, aligned for conflict.

Half a century gives time to gather data, to measure losses, to
calculate sacrifices, to weigh difficulties, to figure results, and
to look calmly and justly at the history and the conduct of what must
ever be classed as one of the great wars of the ages.

The very fact that the South lost lends pathos and sentiment to
the story of what her sons accomplished. As time, aided by the
scrutinizing finger of Truth, points out with impartial fairness what
each did in this gigantic grapple between two Anglo-Saxon armies, we
are enabled, even now, while thousands of participants remain, to
judge, recount and chronicle with accuracy the most important events
that marked this mighty struggle.

Cavalry played a most important part in the Civil War. In fact,
without this arm of the service, the Confederacy could not have
so long maintained the unequal contest; nor the Federal Army have
prevailed as quickly as was done. The story of the campaigns of
Stuart, Wheeler, Morgan, the Lees, Forrest, Hampton, Ashby, Mosby,
Green, Van Dorn, Shelby and Marmaduke, and their associates, gave
war a new glamour, opened to chivalry a wider field for operation,
painted to adventurous genius more entrancing visions, and made the
service of men who rode to battle a transcendent power of which
warriors had hitherto not even dreamed.

So far as has been historically made known, there is no similar
service performed by the cavalry of any period. General Morgan, with
his command, made two distinct marches of one thousand miles each
into a hostile country. Shelby is reported to have ridden fifteen
hundred miles when he raided into Missouri in September, 1863. There
were times, probably, when Stuart and Hampton and their associates
had fiercer conflict, but the strain was never so long drawn out
and the calls on nerve and muscle and brain were never so severely
concentrated as in these marches of Morgan and Shelby.

General Wheeler, in his raid around Rosecrans, was twenty-five
days in the rear of the enemy, menaced on every side, and his men
fought with a courage that was simply transcendent. His marches
were characterized by fierce fighting and covered a more limited
territory, but his captures and his destruction of property have few
counterparts.

No fair man, reading the story of General Dick Taylor’s exploits,
in the spring of ’64, can come to any other conclusion than that he
and his men were heroic, of abundant patience and exhibited almost
unlimited physical endurance.

The same can be said of Forrest. He did not ride so far as Morgan,
Marmaduke or Shelby on a single expedition, but what he lacked in
distance he made in overcoming difficulties and in the extent and
constancy of conflict, and in the tremendous losses inflicted upon
his enemy’s property and troops.

Shelby’s Raid into Missouri in September, 1863, which lasted
thirty-six days and involved marching fifteen hundred miles, an
average of thirty miles per day, is a story of extraordinary skill
and endurance.

Stuart’s Chickahominy raid around McClellan’s army, his march to
Chambersburg and return, and the Battle of Fleetwood Hill will ever
command the admiration of cavalry students.

Hampton’s Trevilian campaign, his cattle raid, and the management of
General Lee’s cavalry before Petersburg point to him as a leader of
wondrous enterprise, a soldier of unbounded daring and a strategist
of great ability.

The cavalry generals who have been chosen as the chief subjects of
this book all possessed, in a remarkable degree, the power of winning
the confidence of their followers and their loyal support under all
circumstances. With Hampton, men followed wherever he led, they never
reasoned why they should go, they only asked that they be informed as
to the will of their leader. And so it was true of Morgan, Stuart,
Forrest, Shelby and Wheeler. They all had the absolute trust of
their followers. No man beneath them in command ever questioned
their wisdom or their judgment in battle or march. But when it came
to inspiring men with the spirit of absolute indifference to death
and relentlessness in the pursuit of the enemy, few would deny that
Nathan Bedford Forrest did this more effectively than any leader who
was engaged in the struggle. Generals Lee, Stonewall Jackson, Albert
Sidney Johnson, Joseph E. Johnston always commanded the respect,
devotion, love and admiration of their soldiers to such an extent
that at any time they would have marched into the very jaws of death,
under their leadership; but those who study the life and the extent
of Nathan Bedford Forrest’s achievements will generally agree that
in inspiring his soldiers to fierce, persistent battle and absolute
indifference in conflict, few, if any, equalled him, none surpassed
him. The conduct of his soldiers at Bryce’s Cross-roads, where he
fought first cavalry and then infantry, sometimes mounted, most
generally on foot, would show that he could exact from men as superb
service as any soldier who ever led his followers into battle.

This suggestion as to Forrest does not detract from the glory of any
other Confederate leader. We meet this almost hypnotic influence in
many phases of life other than military. Those who study the actions
and characteristics of General Forrest and who looked upon the faces
of the men following him could but realize that by his bearing,
example and dash he got the best and bravest that it was possible for
human nature in war to give.

Romance, patriotism and love of adventure inspired the cavalry of
the Confederacy to follow their renowned leaders. No man who has
calmly read the stories of the conflicts and marches of the Army of
Northern Virginia, or the Army of Tennessee, or of the Army of the
Trans-Mississippi Department can fail to be filled with wonder at the
duties the soldiers of these armies so cheerfully and so willingly
performed. Without pay, illy clad and poorly fed, yet they were
always brave. Though hungry in battle they were always courageous;
and in conflict they had only one aim, and that was to defend their
country and destroy its enemies.

There was much in the narratives of the South’s past to inspire
cavalrymen with Lighthorse Harry Lee valor. Their fathers and
grandfathers had ridden with Marion and Sumpter, had fought with
Shelby, Preston, Sevier and Campbell at King’s Mountain, or had gone
with Isaac Shelby and General Harrison into Canada to fight the
Battle of the Thames, or composed the dragoons who had gone with
Scott and Taylor to Mexico. The boys and young men of the South had
read and reread the accounts of what these horsemen of the long ago
had accomplished, of the dangers they had faced and the laurels they
had won, and these records of a splendid past filled their hearts
with deepest love of their country, and fired their souls to make
achievements the equal of those of their renowned ancestry. The
most romantic and chivalrous side of both the Revolutionary War and
the War of 1812 had their happenings with horsemen, and the most of
those were either on the Southern soil or came from the states which
sympathized with the South.

It was this antecedent history that gave such impetus to the
Confederate youth to find, if possible, a place in the cavalry. The
men of the South were not only familiar with the use of firearms,
but a majority of them were skilled horsemen, and these two things
combined brought to the Confederate cavalry volunteers, active,
adventurous, daring, reckless, vigilant, chivalrous soldiers that
were bound to perform the highest type of military work.

In the American war, cavalry was to change its arms, the sabre was to
be almost entirely eliminated. In its place was to come the revolver
and the repeating rifle, the magazine gun and the short Enfield.
The holsters were to be abandoned. Instead, the belt with the six
shooters and the sixty rounds of ammunition. These new cavalrymen
were not only to serve as scouts, but to act as infantry, to cover
military movements, to destroy the lines of communication, to burn
stores, to tear up lines of railway, to gather supplies, to fight
gunboats, capture transports; all these without any equipment of
any kind, except their horses, their arms and some horse artillery
of limited range. In a large part, they were to feed in the enemy’s
country, rely upon their foes for arms and ammunition. They were
to have no tents; no wagons, except for ammunition; no cooking
utensils, other than a wrought iron skillet. These, with canteens
and food found on the march, were to prove their only means of
subsistence. They were to be trained to ride incessantly, charge
stockades, capture forts, take their place alongside of the infantry
on the battle line, and to build or defend hastily constructed
fortifications. No cavalry before had performed these services and
none will ever perform them again. The newer conditions of warfare
will change altogether the work that will be required of cavalry. The
improvement in firearms, particularly in the artillery, would render
the oldtime cavalry superfluous and its use, under the past methods,
a simple slaughter without benefit.

These men, carried by horses with great celerity from place to place,
were to perform a distinct and different service in war; sometimes in
a single night they would march fifty miles. Sometimes in a day they
would march seventy-five to ninety miles. They would destroy stores
of supplies, wreck railroads, burn water stations, demolish trestles,
attack and burn wagon trains. Their best living was to be obtained
by victory and the popular application to the fortunes of war the
maxim—“That they should take who have the power, and they should keep
who can.”

To fit them for such service, a new system of drill was instituted;
half cavalry and half infantry, fighting on foot, in open rank;
the charge on infantry on horseback was to become practically
obsolete. They were, if occasion demanded, to be dismounted, fight
in entrenchments alongside infantry, and charge batteries and
abattis, the same as the infantry. With boundless energy, unlimited
enthusiasm and a measureless love of adventure, the horseman was
to meet these new requirements and frequently do all that infantry
could do and, in addition, do what cavalry had never done before. In
the West, this combined and new call for cavalry obtained its birth
and hold and received its first and most successful development. It
is urged that to General John H. Morgan and his followers ought to
be accredited the application and successful demonstration of these
new methods, which were to add such immense value to cavalry work.
No commander ever before undertook to commit such tasks to horsemen.
But the Southern soldier, who first developed all these qualities and
performed these varying tasks, was to open for the Southern cavalry
service an unlimited field for harassing, delaying, starving and even
destroying opposing armies.

The marvelous endurance of the men who followed Forrest and Stuart
and Morgan and Wheeler and Hampton and Shelby and Green and
McCullough and Price has never been equalled. Storms and floods had
no terror for these. No enemy was safe from their avenging hand and
no vigilance could defy their enterprise. There were no alarms in
any work for these brave and tireless riders. Single riders and even
small troops of cavalry had made marches of a hundred miles in a day,
but it remained for generals like Wheeler and Morgan and Forrest and
Stuart and Hampton and Shelby and Marmaduke and Green to demonstrate
the potency and tremendous value of cavalry in war, and lengthen the
possibility of a day’s march.

For the first two years of the conflict, the Confederate cavalry
were practically supreme. Their enemies were slow to absorb these
new methods and to apprehend the advantages of this new system.
Stuart’s Chickahominy raid, his march from Chambersburg; Morgan’s
two marches of a thousand miles each; Forrest’s pursuit of Streight
and his raid into Kentucky and Tennessee, under the most adverse
physical difficulties, in midwinter or early spring, and his ride
into Memphis, read more like fairy stories than the performance of
men composed of flesh and blood. Wheeler’s raid in Rosecrans’ rear,
his expedition into East Tennessee and the endurance of his men are
almost incredible. These do not read like the performance of real
soldiers, but more like the make-up of a military dreamer. One may
call over the names of the great battles of the war, either east
or west of the Mississippi River, and while the account of these
engagements lose none of their brilliancy in comparison with those
of any war, yet they cannot surpass, nor in some respects equal,
the work performed by the cavalry. Fleetwood Hill (Brandy Station),
Trevilian Station, Hanging Fork, Chambersburg, Hartsville, Cynthiana,
Shiloh, Mt. Sterling, Bryce’s Cross-roads, Parker’s Cross Roads
and Dug Creek Gap. Marmaduke’s and Shelby’s Missouri raids and the
pursuit of Stoneman, Garrard and McCook, during the Atlanta siege,
are stories of valor, endurance and sacrifice that lose nothing in
comparison with the deeds of any other organization of the armies
of the Confederate States. In exposure, in daring, in physical
privations, in patience, in cheerfulness under defeat, in willingness
to do and dare, the horsemen of the Confederacy must always command
the admiration of those who study military records.

An unusual proportion of the Confederate cavalry came from eight
states,—Virginia, Kentucky, Missouri, Tennessee, Texas, Alabama,
Mississippi and South Carolina. When we call the cavalry roll, its
names awaken memories of some of the most heroic deeds known among
men. Every Confederate state furnished a full quota of horsemen, and
none of them failed to make good when the crucial test came.

Alabama sent into this branch of service Generals William Wirt Allen,
James Hogan, Moses W. Hannon, John Herbert Kelley, Evander M. Law,
John T. Morgan and P. D. Roddy.

Kentucky furnished Generals Abram Buford, George B. Cosby, Basil
W. Duke, Charles W. Field, James N. Hawes, Ben Hardin Helm, George
B. Hodge, Joseph H. Lewis, Hylan B. Lyon, John H. Morgan, John S.
Williams, W. C. P. Breckenridge and R. M. Gano.

Missouri brought as part of her offering Generals John S. Marmaduke,
Joseph O. Shelby and John G. Walker.

Tennessee gave Frank C. Armstrong, Tyree H. Bell, Alexander W.
Campbell, Henry B. Davidson, George G. Dibrell, Benjamin J. Hill,
W. Y. C. Humes, W. H. Jackson, John C. Vaughn, Lucius M. Walker and
Nathan Bedford Forrest.

Mississippi sent Generals Wirt Adams, James H. Chalmers, Samuel G.
Gohlson, W. T. Martin, Peter B. Stark and Earl Van Dorn.

Georgia, Generals Robert H. Anderson, Charles C. Crews, Alfred
Iverson, P. M. B. Young.

Florida, General G. M. Davis and Colonel J. J. Dickinson.

South Carolina, M. C. Butler, Thomas F. Drayton, John Dunnovant,
Samuel W. Ferguson, Martin W. Geary, Thomas M. Logan, Wade Hampton.

North Carolina gave Lawrence S. Baker, Rufus Barriger, James B.
Gordon, Robert Ransom, William Paul Roberts.

Maryland, Bradley T. Johnson and Joseph Lancaster Brent (the latter
only an acting brigadier).

West Virginia, William L. Jackson, Albert Gallatin Jenkins, John
McCausland.

Virginia, Turner Ashby, Richard L. T. Beale, John Randolph Chambliss,
James Dearing, John D. Imboden, William E. Jones, Fitz Hugh Lee, W.
H. F. Lee, Lumsford L. Lomax, Thomas Taylor Munfod, William Henry
Fitzhugh Payne, Beverly H. Robertson, Thomas L. Rosser, J. E. B.
Stuart, William C. Wickham.

Louisiana, Daniel W. Adams, Franklin Gardner, Thomas M. Scott.

Arkansas, William N. R. Beall, William L. Cabell, James F. Fagan,
James McQueen McIntosh.

The Indian Territory, Stand Watie.

Texas, Arthur Pendleton Bagby, Hamilton P. Bee, Xavier Blanchard De
Bray, Thomas Green, W. P. Hardemen, Thomas Hamson, Ben McCulloch,
James P. Major, Samuel-Bell Maxey, Horace Randal, Felix H. Robertson,
Lawrence Sullivan Ross, W. R. Scurry, William Steele, Richard
Waterhouse, John A. Wharton, John W. Whitfield.

This one book must, in the very nature of things, be limited to a few
hundred pages.

It does not and cannot undertake to tell all that was glorious
and courageous in the service of the men who led and composed the
Confederate cavalry. There will doubtless be some who will ask why
certain battles and experiences were omitted. The author may have
selected, in some instances, what would appear to many critics and
readers not the most notable events in the Confederate cavalry work.

He may have inadvertently left out names that ought to have been
mentioned, campaigns that were of vast importance, and battles that
were full of sublime sacrifice and marked by the _superbest_ skill.

The book is written with the bias of a cavalry man. It is written
by a man who knows, by personal experience only, some of the things
that happened where Forrest, Wheeler and Morgan fought. He only knew
personally three of the men whose leadership and skill are detailed
in the book. He never saw Stuart but once, and Forrest a few times,
but he loves the fame of all these splendid men and has endeavored to
do each the fullest justice.

There were one hundred and four Confederate generals, from brigadier
up, who at various times led the horsemen of the South. A volume
could be written of the services of each. A majority of them were
equally brave and valiant, but fate decreed some should pass under
the fiercest light, and win from fame its most generous awards. It
may be that hereafter other volumes will be written to tell, if not
who, what the Confederate horsemen were. One of the chiefest aims
of this volume is to give Confederate cavalry leaders and their
followers their just place in the history of the great war. There is
neither purpose nor desire to take aught from any other branch of
the service. The Confederate infantry, artillery and navy have each
a distinct place in the struggle of the South for its national life.
Every Confederate loves every other Confederate and glories in all
that he did to win the immortality of the Confederate armies. The
cavalryman asks that his work may be recognized and that his proper
place shall be assigned him in the phalanxes of the brave who stood
for Southern independence. He covets none of the fame that justly
belongs to his comrades in other lines. He only seeks that what he
did may be honestly told, and his achievements be truly recorded. He
feels that he did the best that he could and that he is entitled to
a complete narrative of that which he did and endeavored to do for
his country. He does not claim that he was braver or more patriotic
than his comrades who fought in other departments. He only asks that
the world may know the dangers he had faced, the difficulties he
overcame, the sacrifices he made, the sufferings he endured and the
results his work accomplished. A true account is his only demand, and
all the world will feel that this is his right.

The writer may not always be literally accurate in the things he
undertakes to recount in this book about Southern cavalry. He may
here and there have made slight mistakes in the description of
the marches and battles he has essayed to describe. Relying upon
books and participants, he could not always get the things just as
they occurred. Eye witnesses often differ in discussing the same
occurrence. There are hundreds of dates and names recorded in these
pages. Error must have crept in, but in the main the history is what
really happened, and these happenings alone will give Confederate
cavalry fame and renown in all ages and amongst all nations.

They make up a great history of great leaders and valiant soldiers,
and they must surely add something to the store of human heroism.

There is no desire to depreciate what men on the other side did.
In the later years of the war, the Federal cavalry apprehended
the tactics and the methods of Confederate horsemen, and they
became foemen worthy of any steel. The third year of the struggle,
the mounts of the Southern cavalry became less efficient and the
disparity in arms and supplies more and more depressing amongst the
Confederates. The Federal generals undertook then to cut Confederate
lines of communication, and to destroy their commissary depots and
to disrupt railway transportation. In such work, in 1864 and 1865,
they laid heaviest burdens on the Confederate cavalry; and in many
instances the jaded and starving horses, the illy-fed men, their
scanty supply of ammunition put them at great disadvantage, but they
were, in face of all these difficulties, game, vigilant, aggressive,
enterprising and defiant to the end; and from April, 1864, to April,
1865, there was nothing more brilliant nor historic than the work
of the Confederate horsemen, performed under the most unfavorable
conditions, to stay the tide of Federal advance and success and to
maintain to the end their nation’s hope and their nation’s life.

If the sketches these pages contain shall add one leaf to the
Confederate Laurel Wreath, or bring to Confederate fame fuller
recognition, the author will be many times repaid for the labor,
expense and time expended in their preparation.

  BENNETT H. YOUNG.

  Louisville, Kentucky.
  1914.




CHAPTER I

FORREST AT BRYCE’S CROSS ROADS, JUNE 10TH, 1864


The spring and summer of 1864 in Virginia, Tennessee, Mississippi,
Georgia and in the Trans-Mississippi Department proved one of the
most sanguinary periods of the war.

During this time, Joseph E. Johnston made his superb retreat from
Dalton to Atlanta, regarded by military historians as one of the
ablest strategic movements of the campaigns from ’61 to ’65, and
General Robert E. Lee, in his famous defensive campaign culminating
in the decimation of Grant’s armies at Cold Harbor, had killed or
wounded more than eighty thousand of General Grant’s followers,
twenty thousand more effective men than Lee’s whole army numbered!

In the Trans-Mississippi, between April and August, ’64, General Dick
Taylor at Mansfield and Pleasant Hill gained glorious victories in
attempting to stay the advance of General Banks into the heart of
Louisiana; and Kirby Smith, Price, Shelby and Marmaduke in Arkansas
still maintained a courageous front to the foe. After three years
of constant fighting, their soldiers were more thoroughly inured to
the hardships of war, better trained to face its dangers, and men on
both sides exhibited a recklessness in facing death which marked the
highest tide of courage.

Early in the war the cavalry became one of the most effective arms
of the agencies of the Confederates. With the vast territory in the
West defended by the Confederacy, with a frontier line twenty-five
hundred miles in extent, the marching speed of which mounted men are
capable, the cavalry of the South, at this period, enabled them to
do more, man for man, than any arm of the South’s defenders. They
proved not only the best allies of the Confederate cause, but later
developed some of the most renowned cavalry leaders of the world.

There were many cavalry battles during the fifteen hundred and twenty
days of the war—Trevilian Station, Fleetwood Hill, sometimes called
“Brandy Station,” Harrisburg, Hartsville, Okolona, Murfreesboro,
Shiloh, Parkers Cross Roads, Reams Station, all of which gave
resplendence to the fame of the Confederate horsemen. Over and above
these cavalry battles, there was Bryce’s Cross Roads, designated by
the Federals as the Battle of Tishomingo Creek. Measured by losses,
it stands pre-eminent; along strategic lines it is amongst the first,
and counted by results to the defeated foe, it has no counterpart in
any engagement fought entirely on one side by cavalry.

On the Federal side, two thousand officers and men, including the
wounded, were made prisoners, and more than twelve hundred dead
were left on the battlefield or in close proximity thereto, if
Forrest’s contemporary reports be correct. The Confederates lost a
hundred and forty killed and three hundred wounded. General Forrest
held the battlefield. His forces buried the dead, and his count was
based upon the fullest knowledge of the tremendous mortality of this
sanguinary engagement. There were differing statements concerning
the casualties. The numbers here given are from men who saw the havoc
on the field.

At Fleetwood Hill, the Confederates lost five hundred and
twenty-three killed and wounded, and the Federals nine hundred
and thirty-six killed and wounded. At Trevilian Station, a purely
cavalry engagement, June 11th, 1864, Hampton carried into battle
four thousand seven hundred men against nine thousand Federals.
After the battle and in ten days’ subsequent fighting, his losses
in killed, wounded and prisoners were less than seven hundred.
He captured six hundred and ninety-five Federals, including one
hundred and twenty-five wounded. Hampton’s killed numbered less than
seventy-five. In the Trevilian campaign, continuing fifteen days,
Hampton’s losses did not exceed seven hundred and fifty killed,
wounded and missing, while the Federals report a loss of one thousand
five hundred and twelve, more than twice that of the Confederates.
At Hartsville, the Confederates lost a hundred and twenty-five
killed and wounded, and the Federals four hundred and thirty, with
eighteen hundred captured. At Harrisburg, Mississippi, one thousand
two hundred and eighty-seven Confederates were killed and wounded. At
Bull Run the Federals lost in killed and wounded one thousand four
hundred and ninety-two, with one thousand four hundred and sixty
missing. The Confederates lost one thousand eight hundred and seven.
On both sides approximately fifty-six thousand men were engaged.
At Shiloh, April 6th and 7th, 1862, the Federal death roll was
seventeen hundred and that of the Confederates seventeen hundred and
twenty-eight, and yet on both sides ninety thousand men were engaged
in the struggle. At Wilson’s Creek, the Federal loss was one thousand
three hundred and seventeen, the Confederate loss one thousand two
hundred and eighteen. There the forces were nearly evenly matched,
and there were about ten thousand in the struggle. Accepting General
Forrest’s report to be true that more than twelve hundred men were
killed and wounded in the six hours of fighting at Bryce’s Cross
Roads, then more men were killed and captured on that day than in any
two other purely cavalry engagements of the war.

By June, 1864, Forrest had reached the full tide of his fame. He had
improved every opportunity to develop his genius, and he never failed
to make use of all the fighting opportunities that came his way. He
did not always get the best the quartermaster had, and he had been
hampered by interference from headquarters. He had long since ceased
to rely upon his government for his mounts, clothing, arms and food.
He had months before learned from actual experience that the Federals
had better supplies than it was possible for the Confederacy to
distribute, and that capture from his enemies was a quicker and surer
way of getting what he wanted than to risk the red tape and poverty
of Confederate quartermaster regulations.
